# Updating the runtime object

This document refers to the Runtime interface defined in [packages/teams-js/src/public/runtime.ts](/packages/teams-js/src/public/runtime.ts). The runtime object describes the capabilities and configuration of the host and is versioned so that the teams-js library may parse older versions of the runtime. The following information describes when and how the Runtime version should be updated.

## What constitutes a major version change?

A major version change is one by which it is impossible to either upgrade from the previous version to the next version or downgrade from the next version to the previous version without losing functionality. For example, if capabilities x and y are merged into a new capability z, then we cannot determine if z is supported in the new version unless both x and y are supported in the previous version. If x but not y was supported in the previous version, then z must be defined as unsupported in the next version and all functionality covered under x is lost despite no changes being made to the host’s functionality. Similarly, if a capability is split into two different capabilities then we cannot determine if that capability in the previous version is supported based on the capabilities in the next version.

## What constitutes a minor version change?

A minor version change is one by which the previous version can be transformed into the next version and back without any loss of teams-js functionality.

## I am making a change to the runtime object. Do I need to update the runtime version?

### *I have added a required property to IRuntime*

- Yes – new minor version is required if this property can be generated by App SDK without loss of some previously supported functionality, new major version is required if some previously supported functionality is lost when this property is not provided by the host.

### *I have added an optional property or supported capability*

- No – new version is not required.

### *I have renamed or moved a supported capability*

- Yes – new minor version is required.

### *I have removed a supported capability*

- Yes – new major version is required.

### *I have merged or split capabilities*

- Yes – new major version is required.

## How do I update the runtime version

1. Determine if a major or minor version change is required based on the descritions above
2. Update `latestRuntimeApiVersion` in [runtime.ts](/packages/teams-js/src/public/runtime.ts) to the new version number
3. Create a new interface that extends IBaseRuntime for the new version (`IRuntimeVX_Y extends IBaseRuntime { apiVersion: x.y; ... }`)
4. Set type alias Runtime to the new runtime interface (`type Runtime = IRuntimeVX_Y`)
5. Add an `IRuntimeUpgrade` to the `upgradeChain` that will transform the previous runtime version to the new one
6. Update "runtime versioning" tests in `packages/teams-js/test/public/runtime.spec.ts` to use new version number
7. Add a test for upgrading from the previous runtime version to the new one

### Example using the V2 runtime interface

1. The V2 runtime interface splits the dialog capability into sub-capabilities so a new major version is required. This means we are moving from version 1 to version 2 of the runtime.
2. [runtime.ts](/packages/teams-js/src/public/runtime.ts) - Set `export const latestRuntimeApiVersion = 2;`.
3. [runtime.ts](/packages/teams-js/src/public/runtime.ts) - Create the V2 interface:

```
interface IRuntimeV2 extends IBaseRuntime {
  readonly apiVersion: 2;
  readonly supports {
    ...
    readonly dialog?: {
      readonly card?: {
        readonly bot?: {};
      };
      readonly url?: {
        readonly bot?: {};
      };
      readonly update?: {};
    };
    ...
  };
}
```

4. [runtime.ts](/packages/teams-js/src/public/runtime.ts) - Set `export type Runtime = IRuntimeV2;`
5. [runtime.ts](/packages/teams-js/src/public/runtime.ts) - Add an `IRuntimeUpgrade` to `upgradeChain` that will transform an `IRuntimeV1`-shaped object into an `IRuntimeV2`-shaped object:

```
export const upgradeChain: IRuntimeUpgrade[] = [
  {
    versionToUpgradeFrom: 1,
    upgradeToNextVersion: (previousVersionRuntime: IRuntimeV1): IRuntimeV2 => {
      return {
        apiVersion: 2,
        hostVersionsInfo: undefined,
        isLegacyTeams: previousVersionRuntime.isLegacyTeams,
        supports: {
          ...previousVersionRuntime.supports,
          dialog: previousVersionRuntime.supports.dialog
            ? {
                card: undefined,
                url: previousVersionRuntime.supports.dialog,
                update: previousVersionRuntime.supports.dialog?.update,
              }
            : undefined,
        },
      };
    },
  },
];
```

In this case, the V1 dialog capability is equivalent to the V2 dialog.url capability, so the `supports` field is updated accordingly.

6. [runtime.spec.ts](/packages/teams-js/test/public/runtime.spec.ts) - Set the apiVersion in the `runtime` used in the `latestRuntimeVersion should match Runtime interface apiVersion` to 2:

```
it('latestRuntimeVersion should match Runtime interface apiVersion', () => {
  const runtime: Runtime = {
    apiVersion: 2,
    supports: {},
  };
  expect(latestRuntimeApiVersion).toEqual(runtime.apiVersion);
});
```

7. [runtime.spec.ts](/packages/teams-js/test/public/runtime.spec.ts) Add a test for upgrading a V1 runtime object to V2:

```
it('applyRuntime fast-forwards v1 runtime config to latest version', () => {
  const runtimeV1 = {
    apiVersion: 1,
    isLegacyTeams: false,
    supports: {
      dialog: {
        bot: {},
        update: {},
      },
    },
  };

  const fastForwardConfig = fastForwardRuntime(runtimeV1);
  expect(fastForwardConfig).toEqual({
    apiVersion: latestRuntimeApiVersion,
    hostVersionsInfo: undefined,
    isLegacyTeams: false,
    supports: { dialog: { card: undefined, url: { bot: {}, update: {} }, update: {} } },
  });
});